Opening Trainer User Manual
Joshua Blinkhorn August 2020

Opening Trainer is a command line program that trains your opening repertoire with spaced repetition and active recall learning.
Positions from your repertoire are scheduled for recall at the optimal time to minimise the effort needed to memorise them.
The emphasis is on position-based learning, rather than the traditional line-based learning.

OPENING THE TRAINER

Open a terminal and type

     python3 trainer.py

The main menu lists your repertoires and their statistics:

ID: 	      each repertoire has an ID (starting from 1). IDs progress in alphabetical order by repertoire name.
COV.: 	      coverage, i.e. the percentage of the repertoire that you have learned to date
WAITING:      the number of positions ready (for learning or recal) right now
LEARNED:      the number of learnded positions
INACTIVE:     the number of positions neither learned nor currently ready for learning
TOTAL:	      the total number of positions in the repertoire

Only positions which require a solution are counted -- that is, position in which you are to move, and the unique correct move is specified in your repertoire.

Trainer ships with a default repertoire in the Traxler gambit (1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Nf6 4. Ng5 Bc5?!) to get you started.
Of course, you will want to build your own custom repertoires.
The Traxler is included in case you wish to grips with the program right away.

ENTERING MOVES

Opening Trainer has no GUI yet, so moves must be entered as text in UCI notation (this is required during repertoire management, but not during training).
UCI notation is a very simple convention that names the home and target square of the moved piece -- for example, `1. Nf3' is written `g1f3'.
Every move is represented similarly as a four character string with the exception of pawn promotion, which appends the promoted piece ('N', 'B', 'R' or 'Q') as the fifth and final character, for example 'g7g8Q'.

CREATING A NEW REPERTOIRE

In the main menu, type 'n' and hit enter.
You will be prompted to navigate to the starting position of your repertoire.
Enter moves in UCI notation until the desired position is reached, and then hit enter.
To retract a move, type `b' and hit enter.

When you have selected the starting position, you will be prompted to choose white/black and name for your repertoire.
Then you are returned to the main menu, where you will see your new repertoire in the list.
The new repertoire has zero stats, because it is empty - it consists only of a starting position.
Content (moves, lines) is added to a repertoire via the management menu.

MANAGING A REPERTOIRE

Repertoire management is where the details of repertoire can be edited.
You will build a tree of moves that specify all of your opponents moves that you want to consider (termed `problems'), together with your chosen responses (termed `solutions').

To go to repertoire management, first go to the repertoire overview by typing its ID in the main menu and hitting enter.
Then type 'm' and hit enter again.
Follow the on screen instructions to enter moves into the tree.

Usually you will specify exactly one solution to each problem.
However, you can specify more than one solution, in which case the `main solution' (i.e. the one listed first underneath the position diagram) will be the move included in your repertoire.
Other solutions can be promoted to the main solution by typing 'p' and hitting enter, followed by specifying the move to be promoted.
This allows you to work on various solutions simultaneously, without deleting your work every time you switch.

TRAINING A REPERTOIRE

To go to repertoire training, first select the repertoire from the main menu by typing its ID and hitting enter.
Then type 'm' and hit enter again.
The trainer will cycle through all the scheduled problems and close when complete, returning to the repertoire overview.

Repertoire training is a scheduled process of solution learning and recall.
Solution are first learned in a three step process, then they are scheduled for recall at a later date.
Scheduling intervals are determined based on how well you know a position.

The learning process has three stages:

1 - the position is new, you haven't seen it before and you are shown the solution.
2 - you recall the position for the first time.
3 - you recall the position for the second time.

After completing that process, the position is deemed `learned' and it will be scheduled for recall, the first recall scheduled for the following day.

After every recall, you can select three options: `easy', `ok' or `hard'.
Selecting `ok' gives rise to the default behaviour, and should be chosed if you managed to recall the move within a reasonable amout of time (say up to 15 seconds.)
Selecting `easy' will cause the position to scheduled at longer intervals. This should be chosen if the solution is obvious to you, for example a forced move.
Selecting `hard' will cause the position to be scheduled sooner; learned solution deemed 'hard' must be relearned.
(Future versions may enable further customisation of learning behaviour for `hard' solutions).

TRANSPOSITIONS

Sometimes your repertoire will lead you to the same position in more than one way - this is called `transposition'.
Transpositions with and between repertoires are not recognised automatically (this feature may be enabled in future versions).
Hence, it is currently the user's responsibility to handle transpositions within repertoire management.
If you duplicate positions, you will also duplicate your training.

BUG FIXES

If you find a bug, please report it to `joshuablinkhorn@hotmail.co.uk'. Thanks!
